Sydney Dive Site Hints
"Tiny baby Port Jackson sharks can be seen in October at Bass and Flinders"
East North Bommie - Ulladulla
Michael McFadyen's Scuba Diving - East North Bommie
The South Coast town of Ulladulla is located about 200 kilometres south of Sydney. It is about a two and a half to three hour drive to Ulladulla (depending on the traffic). At times like Easter, then the drive can take up to four hours. 
There are some very good dive sites at Ulladulla. A lot of them are very close to the small harbour, places like Home Bommie and 
Lighthouse Wall
. Another close spot is East North Bommie. This is located just under two kilometres from the wharf. The site is 35° 20.9828' S 150° 29.4691' E (using WGS84 as datum). If you use any other datum, you should read my 
GPS Web Site
 as you may end up over 200 metres off the site. 
This site is a reef that runs north-south. It is not a wall as such, although there are some sections where there is a shear wall. Anchor anywhere on the top of the reef (20 metres). One under the water, go to the east and drop over to the bottom. The depth of the sand is about 25 to 26 metres. Along the edge of the sand, there are some small boulders. Along here you should see some sea dragons. Follow it to the north and the edge winds in and out, but keeps basically to the north. After a while you will see larger boulders or parts of the wall and there are some small overhangs in spots. After 12 minutes or so, turn around and follow the main section of the reef back to the south. There are some small cracks off to the right. These are home to things like eastern blue devilfish, moray eels and nannygais. 
This dive has some of the most beautiful sponges you will see anywhere. There are also sea squirts, gorgonias, lace corals and other fixed life everywhere. Excellent. 
This is a very good dive site, and I can only recommend the diving at Ulladulla as being worth the effort. I have used the services of Ulladulla Divers Suppliers and can also recommend them as being very good and great value.
