Sydney Dive Site Hints
"Lilli Pilli Baths has lots of White's sea horses on the net" 
Hump One - Bass Point
Michael McFadyen's Scuba Diving - Hump One
There are many excellent dive sites in the Shellharbour area. Located only 105 kilometres south of the centre of Sydney (no more than one and a half hours drive from most spots) on the southern edge of Wollongong, Shellharbour is very popular with divers for shore dives but not so popular for boat dives. However, there are many excellent boat dives to do here.
Running north from the very end of the Bass Point Reserve there are a series of perhaps five humps. These humps vary in size from the size of a large house to quite larger reefs. The sand is generally at 35 to 24 metres and the reef top varies from 12 down to almost 30 metres.
Hump One is located at GPS Reading 34° 35.1257' S 150° 54.7690' E (using WGS84 as datum - see my 
GPS Page
 for details). Anchor anywhere on this reef as this is a very small, 50 by 30 metre reef. The top is about 27 metres and the sand just over 35 metres. Note that it can be hard to anchor as there and not many good hold spots, the rocks are all at right-angles to each other. 
The location of the dive site is the small reef to the left of the red X. These are sea floor maps from NSW Government Seed website.
This reef seems to be pear shaped, with the pointy bit facing south. The longer section is north-south. It is very easy to explore as it only takes seven minutes to swim around it at a slow speed. I suggest doing this and then going back to any spot you want to look at again. There are some nice walls, especially on the eastern and southern sides. There are lots of sea whips, sponges and sea squirts all over the reef. The western side has heaps of gorgonias. These are everywhere, as many as I have seen in any location. There are almost none on the eastern side. The gorgonias have lots of seastars on them. 
The fishlife is not always great, you get a few leatherjackets, some Port Jackson sharks, yellowtail, sweep, one-spot pullers and seapike. I have also seen boarfish and kingfish. Look for nudibranches as there are numerous species and they are all in large numbers.
This is a deep dive, only for the experienced. Well worth doing.
